At that time highway engineers traveled rough and dirty roads to accomplish their duties . 
Using privately-owned vehicles was a personal hardship for such employees , and the matter of providing state transportation was felt perfectly justifiable . 
Once the principle was established , the increase in state-owned vehicles came rapidly . 
And reasons other than employee need contributed to the growth . 
Table 1 immediately below shows the rate of growth of vehicles and employees . 
This rate of increase does not signify anything in itself . 
It does not indicate loose management , ineffective controls or poor policy . 
But it does show that automobiles have increased steadily over the years and in almost the same proportion to the increase of state employees . 
In the past twenty years the ratio of state-owned automobiles per state employees has varied from 1 to 22 then to 1 to 23 now . 
Whether there were too few automobiles in 1940 or too many now is problematical . 
The fact is simply that state-owned vehicles have remained in practically the same proportion as employees to use them . 
History and operation of the motor pool . 
While the origin of state-owned automobiles may be obscured , subsequent developments concerning the assignment , use , and management of state automobiles can be related more clearly . 
Prior to 1942 , automobiles were the individual responsibility of the agency to which assigned . 
This responsibility included all phases of management . 
It embraced determining when to purchase and when to trade vehicles , who was to drive , when and where repairs were to be made , where gasoline and automobile services were to be obtained and other allied matters . 
In 1942 , however , the nation was at war . 
Gasoline and automobile tires were rationed commodities . 
The state was confronted with transportation problems similar to those of the individual . 
It met these problems by the creation of the state automobile maintenance unit ( more popularly called the motor pool ) , a centralized operation for the maintenance and control of all state transportation . 
The motor pool then , as now , had headquarter facilities in Providence and other garages located throughout the state . 
It was organizationally the responsibility of the Department of Public Works and was financed on a rotary fund basis with each agency of government contributing to the pool's operation . 
In 1951 the pool's operation was transferred to the newly-created Department of Administration , an agency established as the central staff and auxiliary department of the state government . 
The management of state-owned vehicles since that time has been described in a recent report in the following manner : `` Under this new management considerable progress appears to have been made . 
The agencies of government are now billed for the actual cost of services provided to each passenger car rather than the prior uniform charge for all cars . 
Whereas the maintenance rotary fund had in the past sustained losses considerably beyond expectations , the introduction of the cost-billing system plus other control refinements has resulted in keeping the fund on a proper working basis . 
One indication of the merits of the new management is found in the fact that during the period 1951-1956 , while total annual mileage put on the vehicles increased 35% , the total maintenance cost increased only 11% .
